---
title: XGovFormBuilder community roundup #001
last_modified_date: 2021-11-12
parent: XGovFormBuilder community roundup
---

I (Jen, [@jenbutongit](https://github.com/jenbutongit)) thought I’d do a regular update for our community and share new fixes/features and celebrate our contributors.

### 🎉 Thanks to David Biddle (GDS) for submitting a few issues and PRs!
- We’ve resolved an issue with AWS credential loading, we’re allowing the AWS SDK handle loading the environment variables.
  We’ll have some space now to allow for aws’ other methods of credential loading (like from file)
  [Pull request #683](https://github.com/XGovFormBuilder/digital-form-builder/pull/683)
- The issue with the designer crashing when you try to edit the feedbackForm url has been resolved by David
  [Pull request #693](https://github.com/XGovFormBuilder/digital-form-builder/pull/693)
- as well as some optional fields reporting a field as required https://github.com/XGovFormBuilder/digital-form-builder/pull/692


### 🎉 Thanks also to Canterbury CC
who mistakenly opened a PR against our repo (😉) instead of theirs.. I’ve had a nosey 'round and we could expect
- Freshdesk output integration
- Dynamo persistence integration
- Dynamic values (readonly values that are displayed to the user, based on previous inputs, similar to conditions)

### 🎉 Last but not least, Fred Marecesche (DIT)
- for opening a draft PR for authentication (another frequently requested feature).
  - The PR has started off with an oAuth strategy using [@hapi/bell](https://hapi.dev/module/bell) (similar to passport.js for express), so other orgs are free to drop in their own strategies.

We’ve (Caution Your Blast) also managed to do some spiking around pre-filling a form last week as part of our hackathon.
Although I’m not sure how much wizard of oz-ing went on in the other teams, it seems entirely feasible to pull data from another source,
and fill a xgovformbuilder form, which is a feature that’s been mentioned/requested a few times.

You’re always welcome to open issues and PRs, or have a discussion with me on here if you’re not sure whether your feature
should be added to the Open Source repo. I’m also always interested in hearing in what you’re getting up to with forms anyway (even if you don't want to OS your solution 😢). 
It's been a lot of fun catching up with you all this week!

I think I’d like to collate all the repos into an "awesome" xgovformbuilder list so I can point any prospective orgs to
how you’ve set it up and any neat features you’ve added. 


