tools.md, before:

---
title: Tools
nav_order: 4
---

## UK Government open source solutions
### X-gov “form builders”
- Cross Government [Digital form builder](https://github.com/XGovFormBuilder/digital-form-builder)
- [DFE form builder](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/govuk_design_system_formbuilder)
- [DWP form design](https://github.com/dwp/dwp-design)
- [DWP CASA](https://github.com/dwp/govuk-casa)
- [MoJ elements form builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/govuk_elements_form_builder)/ [documentation](https://form-builder-user-guide.form.service.justice.gov.uk/what-youll-need) -> [MoJ form builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/form-builder)->[MoJ Online](https://formbuilder-product-page.apps.live-1.cloud-platform.service.justice.gov.uk/)
- [Home office form builder](https://github.com/UKHomeOfficeForms)
- [Defra digital form builder](https://github.com/DEFRA/digital-form-builder)
- [FCO digital form builder](https://github.com/UKForeignOffice/digital-form-builder)
- [HMCTS sets of form builders](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Ahmcts+form&unscoped_q=form)
- [Ofsted(HMRC) forms](https://github.com/hmrc?q=form&type=&language=)
- [NHS formbuilder wales](https://github.com/hmrc?q=form&type=&language=)
- [BEIS forms-frontend](https://github.com/UKGovernmentBEIS/beis-forms-frontend) and [BEIS forms-backend](https://github.com/UKGovernmentBEIS/beis-forms-backend)

### GDS Design system and frontend
- [GOV.UK design systems](prototyping)(https://design-system.service.gov.uk/)
- [GOV.UK frontend](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend)

<!-- ![](https://i.imgur.com/0MNCvow.png) -->


## Some known commercial offerings
(Not a full and definite not a recommended list)

- Form.io - [open source](https://github.com/formio/formio)
- [UXform](https://www.uxforms.com/documentation/) / Equal expert
- [govforms](https://govforms.co.uk/) [screenshots](https://hackmd.io/fKrZ0Zv3SAKqqyToj_2EVg)
- [Surveyoptics](https://surveyoptic.com/)
- [Form builders on G-Cloud](https://www.digitalmarketplace.service.gov.uk/g-cloud/search?q=form%20building&lot=cloud-software)
- [Equiniti-toplevel open design studio](https://equiniti-toplevel.com/)/ [pdf](https://equiniti-toplevel.com/media/1884/7593_toplevel_open_design_studio_v5.pdf)

## Commodity
- Google forms
- MS forms
- Survey monkey

## GDS Submit resources
GDS submit project in Alpha was decommissioned. Various submit repositories are:

- [paas-submit](https://github.com/alphagov/paas-submit)
- [submit-prototype-kit](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-prototype-kit)
- [submit-forms](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-forms)

In submit repository:

- [Form json example](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-prototype-kit/tree/master/examples)
- [Form specifications](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-prototype-kit/tree/master/schemas)

## International Governments
- Singapore Government Form builders [presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Yq_T8jOhAHA3BLyn1H7cPMBICKYCUmARxRUIe2hwno4/edit#slide=id.g62bfdc73d3_0_778)

Commit message:

Clarify which form builders are maintained

tools.md, after:

---
title: Tools
nav_order: 4
---

## UK Government open source solutions

### X-gov “form builders” that are currently maintained

- [XGov Digital Form Builder](https://github.com/XGovFormBuilder/digital-form-builder)
- [MOJ Form Builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/form-builder) and [MOJ Forms product page](https://formbuilder-product-page.apps.live-1.cloud-platform.service.justice.gov.uk/)
- [GOV.UK Design System Form Builder for Rails, by DfE Digital](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/govuk_design_system_formbuilder)
- [DWP CASA](https://github.com/dwp/govuk-casa)
- [Home Office Forms](https://github.com/UKHomeOfficeForms)
- [NHS Wales formbuilder](https://formbuildertwo.wales.nhs.uk/) looks like it might be maintained

### X-gov “form builders” that aren't maintained

- [MoJ elements form builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/govuk_elements_form_builder)
- [Defra digital form builder](https://github.com/DEFRA/digital-form-builder)
- [FCO digital form builder](https://github.com/UKForeignOffice/digital-form-builder)
- [HMCTS sets of form builders](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Ahmcts+form&unscoped_q=form)
- [Ofsted (HMRC) forms](https://github.com/hmrc?q=form&type=&language=)
- [BEIS forms-frontend](https://github.com/UKGovernmentBEIS/beis-forms-frontend) and [BEIS forms-backend](https://github.com/UKGovernmentBEIS/beis-forms-backend)

### GOV.UK Design System and Frontend
- [GOV.UK Design system](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/)
- [GOV.UK Frontend](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend)

<!-- ![](https://i.imgur.com/0MNCvow.png) -->

## Some known commercial offerings
(Not a full and definitely not a recommended list)

- Form.io - [open source](https://github.com/formio/formio)
- [UXform](https://www.uxforms.com/documentation/) / Equal expert
- [govforms](https://govforms.co.uk/) [screenshots](https://hackmd.io/fKrZ0Zv3SAKqqyToj_2EVg)
- [Surveyoptics](https://surveyoptic.com/)
- [Form builders on G-Cloud](https://www.digitalmarketplace.service.gov.uk/g-cloud/search?q=form%20building&lot=cloud-software)
- [Equiniti-toplevel open design studio](https://equiniti-toplevel.com/)/ [pdf](https://equiniti-toplevel.com/media/1884/7593_toplevel_open_design_studio_v5.pdf)

## Commodity
- Google forms
- MS forms
- Survey monkey

## GDS Submit resources
GDS submit project in Alpha was decommissioned. Various submit repositories are:

- [paas-submit](https://github.com/alphagov/paas-submit)
- [submit-prototype-kit](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-prototype-kit)
- [submit-forms](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-forms)

In submit repository:

- [Form json example](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-prototype-kit/tree/master/examples)
- [Form specifications](https://github.com/alphagov/submit-prototype-kit/tree/master/schemas)

## International Governments
- Singapore Government Form builders [presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Yq_T8jOhAHA3BLyn1H7cPMBICKYCUmARxRUIe2hwno4/edit#slide=id.g62bfdc73d3_0_778)
